of course Marx believed that in a
capitalist society capital would
accumulate in the hands of fewer and
fewer people issue number one was
inequality too much money in too few
hands capital accumulation his response
is one shift the topic from an economic
inequality to hierarchy to claim that
hierarchy is inevitable for men and
beasts three claim that hierarchy has
nothing to do with capitalism anyway
it's quote unquote
much deeper again people used to say
that about slavery while they had
slavery in the Bible it's much deeper
it's not just a problem with ours is
that yeah this misdirection number for
claim the people of deeper psychological
and emotional problems anyway yeah we
may have those problems anyway but look
we this is a problem we want to solve
two-five complain that marx isn't
interested in man's struggle with nature
it is the case that hierarchical
structures dispossessed those people who
are at the bottom those creatures who
are at the bottom
speaking say of animals but it is not
the case that wolves in a pack become
more and more unequal over time there's
a hierarchy among among lobsters how
about the bees you know the queen bee
just totally irrelevant and totally
stupid the people who own property won't
even use residential property not even
getting to commercial they get richer
and richer and the people who pay rent
get poorer and poorer
well yeah but you know wolves well yeah
but you know bees so what human beings
struggle with themselves with the
malevolence that's inside themselves
with the evil that they're capable of
doing with the spiritual and
psychological warfare that goes on
within them so his style of misdirection
really reminds me of a lot of Buddhist
monks but as preachers have known where
whenever they get a challenging question
could even be about something like
slavery they just go back to a set of
well-worn
kind of moral and ethical
generalizations that they know the high
Hensel sympathize with like oh yeah well
um you want to ask me about capital
accumulation and social inequality and
economic inequality getting worse more
Stern ah well you know the real struggle
is within yourself
to people the audience not not pick up
on this how deeply dishonest this is a
lot of our conversations about politics
revolve around a very simple distinction
between right and wrong good and evil
true and false you know what you're
talking about you don't and when you're
dealing with Jordan Peterson the main
question you have to ask is is this
relevant or irrelevant
is this salient or not is this coherent
or incoherent so I'm going to talk about
briefly a brief example illustrating how
profoundly incoherent his criticism of
Karl Marx says that it really just makes
no sense his line of reasoning on Karl
Marx then I'm gonna talk a little bit
about what Karl Marx has meant in my own
life but now for something different
Jordan Peterson of course Marx believed
that in a capitalist society capital
would accumulate in the hands of fewer
and fewer people and that actually is in
keeping with the nature of hierarchical
organizations now the problem with that
is it so much the fact of so there's the
there's accuracy in the accusation that
that is a eternal form of motivation for
struggle but it's an underestimation of
the seriousness of the problem because
it attributes' it to the structure of
human societies rather than the deeper
reality of the existence of hierarchical
structures per se which as they also
characterize the animal kingdom to a
large degree are clearly not only human
constructions so he said it himself
briefly but then he immediately goes
off-topic becomes incoherent starts
misdirecting and misleading eyes he says
the problem is capital accumulating in
the hands of fewer and fewer people all
right no capital is not just money
capital is the ability to make money so
that can be in the form of an investment
capital especially as Marx discusses it
also includes ownership of the means of
production there's a Marxist phrase you
own the factory you own the trucks that
deliver things whatever it is okay so
this is a very
dynamic very powerful form of inequality
it's not just income inequality and over
generations over even a period of 100
years in equality gets worse and worse
and worse a really quick thought
experiment here guys this is a really
good economics 101 thing let's say we
begin with a completely equal society
where everyone is paid the same wages
they do different jobs but we just pass
a law there's a minimum wage there's a
maximum wage everyone in society makes
$15 an hour but some people own
apartments and some people rent
apartments let's say it's 50/50 50% of
people own all the apartments and 50% of
people pay rent what happens over 100
years the 50% of people who pay rent get
poorer and poorer and poorer and the 50%
of people who are receiving the rent
money the landlords get richer and
richer this is one variable now why
because of capital this is the title of
Karl Marx's book that's capitalism what
it's all about right this is a property
ownership and rent it's very simple form
of capital hey how about owning a gold
mine how do you think that works
I think inequality works overtime with a
gold mine some people get richer and
richer
some people get poorer historically
these days the conditions for gold
miners are a lot better than they were
200 years ago we even just the old old
San Francisco Gold Rush and made it made
some people rich it made a lot of people
poor ok so this opens with him
acknowledging the problem Karl Marx is
trying to address is unequal capital
accumulation but less than one minute
later that clip was less than one minute
less than one minute later he is
misrepresenting the problem as the mere
existence of hierarchy something he sees
as more ancient than capitalism and
something that exists already in
relationships between wild animals ok
but hierarchy and capital accumulation
are not the same thing he's misdirecting
he's deceiving the audience intention or
not it's deeply incoherent and dishonest
SRI's doing here so real quick thought
experiment
the military has hierarchy but everyone
in the army could be paid the same way
whatever you can just say hey everyone
in the army is gonna get $100,000 a year
it doesn't matter $50,000 here whatever
it is you'd have one wage for everyone
right or if not the inequality still has
nothing to do with capital or investment
right so even if you have a situation in
the army where the lowest foot soldier
the guy who operates the machine gun is
paid the same amount as his captain or
if they have different wages doesn't
matter still it's not a situation where
the captain of the military the
commander is getting richer and richer
because he's employing or exploiting the
lower ranks of the soldiers because they
pay rent to him or he owns the trucks
that deliver the bread oh yeah hey like
a taxi company he owns the cars and they
be really do the driving so they get
paid a wage when he makes all the
profits because he owns the taxi company
owns the cars and they merely get paid
an hourly wage that's capital that's
inequality created by small numbers of
people open capital so again military
has hierarchy but not capital
accumulation there are two completely
different things guess what lobsters
don't have calculations lobsters don't
have banks and bank loans and they don't
pay rent
there's none of any of the features of
capital society that Carl Marx is
criticizing so yeah you know what
there's inequality among still wolves
and there's an equality in the Army
there's inequality you could have again
doctors in the hospital great you could
have a whole Hospital everyone earns the
same amount of money or you could have a
hospital where the surgeon earns more
than the the nurse but either way it's
not the case that the the doctor is
exploiting the nurse that there's
capital ownership with the doctors that
say I own the equipment so you have to
pay me whatever it is is different and
we're not gonna get a director honest
answer out of Jordan Peter that's the
next problem is that well the ancient
problem of hierarchical structure is
clearly not attributable to capitalism
because it existed long in human history
before capitalism existed and then it
predated human history itself so the
question then arises why would you
necessarily at least implicitly link the
class struggle with capitalism given
that it's a far deeper problem Karl Marx
does not uniquely link class struggle to
capitalism and Peterson is probably not
intentionally lying here but he is
deceiving the audience Karl Marx
describes the whole of human history
going back to ancient Greece and Rome in
terms of class struggle this is an
extremely repetitive and obvious theme
in Marx's writing it isn't something
subtle or contested okay and in fact
this reflects the extent to which Marx's
work really is inspired by and
derivative of Aristotle and now it's
also you understand that this is a
deeper problem for people on the Left
not just for people on the right it is
the case that hierarchical structures
dispossessed those people who are at the
bottom those creatures who are at the
bottom
speaking say of animals but those people
who are at the bottom and that that is a
fundamental existential problem mmm yes
a fundamental existential problem but it
is not the case that wolves in a pack
become more and more unequal over time
oh yeah you know moose moose in the
woods are not equal right because
there's hierarchy among among lobsters
how about the bees you know the Queen
just totally totally stupid I'm sorry so
what do you think oh yeah well you know
um you know it's a problem that in Japan
the people who own property won't even
use residential property not even
getting to commercial they get richer
and richer and the people who pay rent
get poorer and poorer
well yeah but you know wolves well yeah
but you know bees so what it's
irrelevant
well yeah but you know this is more
ancient than capitalism so what that's
the problem we're talking about yeah you
know what they had landlords in ancient
Rome to guess what this is the problem
we want to talk about and this is one of
the things that still makes Marx a
little bit relevant today in the 21st
century not not so terribly wrong in my
opinion but hey um some people read Marx
some people read Aristotle some people
read both um so what is he doing here
he's claiming that these problems are
really quote unquote existential
problems gee that sounds like it's just
a problem you don't want to solve or you
don't want to take well you know the
rent is too high in Tokyo and like you
know people making minimum wage live
these terrible lives
well yeah but you know look at B's look
at me think think about it
actually really okay okay I think we'd
rather rise up and have a revolution and
establish a minimum wage or elect Bernie
Sanders and if it's the pitiable wage or
lower the cost of red thanks thanks for
your advice about the wolves and the
bees homey
so what you're also claiming the
hierarchy not economic inequality and
not capital cumulation but just bare
hierarchy is an inevitable aspect of
life on earth for man and beast so what
would you accept the same argument if it
were offered as a justification of
slavery if somebody were discussing the
economics and legality of slavery would
you accept the argument you said oh well
there will always be inequality just
look at the animal the other thing that
Marx didn't seem to take into account is
that there there are far more reasons
that human beings struggle then their
economic class struggle even if you
build the hierarchical idea into that
which is more comprehensive way of
thinking about it human beings struggle
with themselves with the malevolence
that's inside themselves with the evil
that they're capable of doing with the
spiritual and psychological warfare that
goes on within them so his style of
misdirection really reminds me of a lot
of Buddhist monks but as preachers have
known where whenever they get a
challenging question could even be about
something like slavery they just go back
to a set of well-worn kind of moral and
ethical generalizations that they know
the audience will sympathize with like
oh yeah well you want to ask me about
capital accumulation and social
inequality and economic inequality
getting worse more Stern ah well you
know the real struggle is within
yourself the audience not not pick up on
this how deeply dishonest this is like
you know is this just mr. misdirection
nobody would accept this as a coherent
argument on slavery democracy or any
other topic so what if what if you was
responsive well you raised the specific
issue of slavery well you should realize
that slavery is just one problem people
are struggling with those that's the
word he uses just one problem
I mean they're also struggling with all
kinds of dark malevolence within
themselves well yeah right but this was
supposed to be a response on the issue
of slavery right well you raised this
one specific issue of North Koreans
having the right to vote but that's just
one problem what about what about the
darkness of the human heart what about
psychological problem
what about the malevolence that our
souls were starting with yeah right well
what I'm interested in today is the
future of North Korea and what all of us
are interested in is how we're gonna
cope with social inequality poverty
poverty is really the issue here whether
we're gonna call on Karl Marx as a
source textbook for that we're not and
we're also actually always at odds with
nature and this never seems to show up
in mark so this is all he wants to do he
just wants to try to derail the
conversation this is only like two
minutes
it's his lecture he's like drilling
himself repeatedly issue number one was
inequality too much money in too few
hands capital accumulation his response
is one shift the topic from an economic
equality to hierarchy to claim that
hierarchy is inevitable for man and
beast three claim that hierarchy has
nothing to do with capitalism anyway
it's quote unquote
much deeper again people used to say
that about slavery well they had slavery
in the Bible it's much deeper it's not
just a problem with ours is that yeah
this misdirection number four claimed
the people of deeper psychological and
emotional problems anyway yeah we may
have those problems anyway but look we
this is a problem we want to solve two
five complain that Marx isn't interested
in man's struggle with nature aha
this is worse than being totally
irrelevant this is pure misdirection it
will work equally as well as an excuse
for anything else
and when I say equally well I mean
equally poorly if human beings have a
problem it's because there's a class
struggle that's essentially economic
it's like no human beings have problems
because we come into the life starving
and lonesome and we have to solve that
problem continually and we make our
social arrangements at least in part to
ameliorate that as well as to as to
there's also very little understanding
in the Communist Manifesto that any of
the likes a hierarchical organizations
that human beings have put together I
might have a positive element and that's
an absolute catastrophe because
hierarchical structures are actually
necessary to solve complicated social
problems we have to organize ourselves
in some manner and you have to give the
devil his due and so it is the case
hierarchies dispossessed people and
that's a big problem that's the
fundamental problem of inequality but
it's also the case that hierarchies
happened to be a very efficient way of
distributing resources so what is the
difference between the organization of
the military and the organization of a
school what is the difference between
the organization of a hospital and the
organization of a nightclub
what is the difference from the
organization of a casino and the
organization of parliament a goldmine a
hairdressers salon a taxi company what's
the difference between the organization
of the production of works of art the
way a painter works in a studio and the
organization of a shipping dock how are
we gonna organize our society these are
really meaningful and deep questions you
know do you want to live in a society
where the majority of people most of the
time are making decisions on the basis
of dire economic need or what say oh
well you know once you solve the poverty
and dire economic need people are still
going to be wrestling with these dark
psychological problems and interval
levels yeah great let's get to that
let's get to the point I've lived in
third-world countries you know what
you're right people really don't have
much time to reflect off their
psychological problems and they're dark
you know in term Elevens when you know
their whole lives are just dominated by
the struggle that put bread in their
mouths yeah great idea and it's finally
the case that human hierarchies are not
fundamentally predicated on power and I
would say that biological
anthropological data on that are crystal
clear you don't rise to a position of
authority that's reliable in human
society primarily by exploiting other
people it's a very unstable means of
obtaining power so so that's a problem
so the audience laughs so so that's a
problem the audience laughs for good
reason Oh nobody gets rich by exploiting
other people anymore I've never read
this is 2019 who gets rich off the
exploitation it's very unstable you know
you shouldn't no you shouldn't become
multi-millionaire by exploiting other
people it's very unstable
of course Marx
that in a capitalist society capital
would accumulate in the hands of fewer
and fewer people was this problem solved
was this problem even addressed I mean
he opened by at least sincerely defining
that one problem inequality means too
much money in too few hands capital
accumulation etc did we learn why Marx
was wrong about this issue or any issue
in the opening argument no we did not we
just got a bunch of completely
incoherent and self-indulgent crap
shirred used to accept video I guess you
just do a separate video I don't know um
my parents were communists my parents
were Marxists reading Karl Marx was
supposed to be a big deal for me in a
sense it was my mother didn't just
respect Marx she was a little bit afraid
of Marx like the way she even handled
the book and talked about the book
you could tell she thought this really
had the power to corrupt people and
dominate your life and totally change
who you are and stuff and maybe those
because that was her own experience or
maybe this goes back when she was a
communist when she was surrounded by
their far left-wing people she saw the
way their lives changed now is it too
much to say their lives changed because
of that book you know what they read
that book maybe they talked about their
own lives in terms of well this is what
I was like before I read Karl Marx and
then in university that read Karl Marx
their whole life change for whatever
reason I remember my mother really
regarded Marx that way with this kind of
it really was like a hallowed Bible Das
Kapital that she was very in some ways
proud of in some ways afraid of and she
was kind of worried about what would
happen to me when I finally read Marx
you really picked up the vibe there my
father's attitude a little bit different
my father was both more of a Stalinist
and more of a Maoist and that he from
its kind of the later thinkers and
communists a big deal and but before I
read Marx I basically read all of the
major economic thinkers that he was
derivative of because I knew that in the
history of economics really the major
discoveries and major breakthroughs or
before Karl Marx and then Karl Marx was
a figure who's kind of like a
commentator drawing together those
observations and making a political
platform at it so I read Adam Smith I
read Ricardo I read
the the truly classical economists the
the guys who were really before
liberalism meant anything I've read some
of the later liberal thinkers to guys
like okay I'm not gonna list off all the
various ad this I had this very solid
foundation in classical economics
including Malthus and the critique of
Malthus which is a big deal in Marx's
capital so I was already familiar with
that including the fable of the bees by
Mandeville it's another major text in
the history of economics I really had
this this background and reading that
stuff in the first books most of those
are the first books in the English
language ever to advance those ideas
they explain their ideas clearly unlike
more advanced economic textbooks that is
the they really had to explain to their
audience at that time what they meant by
basic terms and concepts and they how
they discovered what they discovered in
terms of really creating the the
foundations for classical economics and
that created the platform for Marx's you
know peculiar movement so when I finally
read Karl Marx it was laughable to me I
thought Marx was an incredibly dishonest
incredibly shallow author who was
intentionally misleading his audience
who was trying to take some of the
simplest concepts in economics and make
them baffling and trying to make his
audience kind of wonderstruck by very
simple ideas about price and wage and
inflation and production and where does
value come from he has I mean as a
stylist he manages to make it quite you
know exciting to talk about economics I
guess that's I guess that's the main
impact as I yet some people read it and
they read it with no prior background in
economics and they felt like wow this is
the first guy to ever figure out really
basic questions about wages and labor
supply and money supply and prices and
inflation and this this kind of thing
but no Marx didn't discover any of it
and he doesn't even do a competent or
honest job providing you with an intro
to economics 101 textbook what he does
is he writes in this the highly
dramatized way about what are very
simple very boring facts of economic
life and he does it in a way to try to
manipulate you and radicalize you the
the most fundamental idea of Marx's Das
Kapital is everything is going to get
worse and worse there's nothing you can
do to make it better the conflicts he
describes between worker employer and
employee etc there's no way to have
ameliorative positive approach to it the
only solution is incredibly violent
revolution that is both the implicit and
explicit thesis throughout the whole
book so you can make that kind of
instance your argument with anything you
could imagine today someone writing a
book about global warming that way where
they only give you one side of the story
they say these are the problems this is
how terrible and terrifying they are
there's no way to improve it
technologically there's no way to
improve it democratically there's nobody
this is that and their thesis implicitly
or explicitly as there has to be some
kind of terrible revolution that that
destroys capitalism I think actually
there are there are some people who are
ecological extremists who write that
style and at most points in Marx even if
you just understand the the basic
rudiments of economics whenever he
presents a problem as impossible to
solve like well no that's why we have
minimum wage well no that's why we have
labor unions well no that's why we have
democracy and and we can discuss these
problem that's why we have health and
safety standards in factories that's why
we have law courts where if your hand
gets crushed at the factory
you can sue your employer and be given
enough money to live the rest of your
life because get your hand crushed that
kind of lawsuit is especially in the
economic case today it's a very
fundamental part of the the developments
of the American economy and workers
rights when IV it hasn't a lot of it
hasn't come through union organization
but actually came through so-called
frivolous lawsuits that really created
workplace standards and transformed the
way factory work happens in America and
transformed many workplaces in many ways
um so at every point in reading Karl
Marx
I was just wincing and I just felt I was
reading a totally insincere book that
that really um you know really was
written by someone who regarded his
audience as a bunch of idiots and that
the tragic history of the world shows
that to a large extent you know he was
right now i I do not sympathize with my
own professor talk about guys who are
alive today but quite elderly who were
caught up in Marx mania and I
known many I've known so many people
with PhDs who are overawed and impressed
by Karl Marx and their professors in
many different departments and then they
spend the rest of their lives making
excuses for Lenin for Stalin for
whatever it is it leads them into a way
of thinking where all kinds of other
evils outside of Marx are justified just
by the respect and admiration they feel
for Karl Marx and what he did basically
in this one book in Das Kapital so again
to me simply that is very very alien if
you are amazed by the quality of the
writing of William Shakespeare that
really doesn't justify anything else
except for William Shakespeare and I
think again it is on that level that
Marx has to sit on the bookshelf you
just have to look at him as this highly
eccentric literary figure who you know
put together a concoction of social
themes and literary themes and yes yeah
I mean most of the stuff Marx writes
about he doesn't know as much as a
Wikipedia article about Karl Marx writes
about the history of India
Marvis knows nothing about the history
Minnie writes for the history of China -
what he writes even about the history of
medieval Germany he wasn't an expert on
this even by the standards of his own
day this one time he was incredibly
ignorant of all these things he also was
at best and educated Lee for assembled
economics I think even that is
flattering him he was a dilettante but
obviously what he wrote was in some
sense a literary masterpiece
you know people read texts like that's
capital and Communist Manifesto and were
swept up with this incredible sense of
excitement and it's really sad and
tragic to reflect that it is not
excitement based on optimism it's not
excitement based on reading a book that
tells you hey the world can be a better
place poverty is a problem we can solve
you know like Bernie Sanders telling you
you could have a minimum wage you can
have cheap health care you can have
affordable university
you could have peace instead of war it's
actually based on the sickest form of
pessimism of Commerce selling you
everything is going to get worse and
worse and worse until one day there's
this unbelievable you know in turn a
scene form of warfare class war and the
horrible reality of class war is exactly
we all saw play out in the history of
the Soviet Union Russia China Laos
Vietnam that's all
did I mention Cambodia
[Music]